
### Creating custom images using Dockerfile:

A Dockerfile is a text file that contains instructions for creating a Docker image. It defines the base image, environment settings, installing dependencies, and running the application in the container.

#### Basic steps to create a Dockerfile:

1. **Select a base image:**
   - Start by selecting a base image that fits your needs. For example, `ubuntu`, `alpine`, `python`, `node`, etc.

2. **Installing dependencies:**
   - Use the instructions in the Dockerfile to install the necessary packages and dependencies. For example, use `apt-get` to install packages in Ubuntu and `apk` in Alpine.

3. **Copying files:**
   - Use the `COPY` or `ADD` instruction to copy files from the host machine to the image.

4. **Environment Setup:**
   - Set environment variables using the `ENV` instruction and set the working directory using `WORKDIR`.

5. **Starting the application:**
   - Use the `CMD` or `ENTRYPOINT` instruction to start your application in the container.

#### Dockerfile Example:

```Dockerfile
# Use the base Python image
FROM python:3.9-slim

# Install dependencies
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y \
    build-essential \
    libpq-dev

# Create and navigate to the working directory
WORKDIR /app

# Copy the dependencies
COPY requirements.txt .

# Install Python dependencies
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt

# Copy the application source code
COPY . .

# Specify a command to run the application
CMD ["python", "app.py"]
```
Of course, let's take a closer look at the Dockerfile capabilities and each line of the previous example.

#### Dockerfile capabilities:

A Dockerfile is a text file that contains a set of instructions for creating a Docker image. In the Dockerfile, you can define:

1. **Select a base image:** Select a base image on which to base your custom image. This can be any image from Docker Hub or your own image based on other images.

2. **Install Dependencies:** You can use the instructions to install packages, libraries, and other dependencies needed for your application.

3. **Copying files:** You can use the `COPY` or `ADD` instructions to copy files from the host machine to the image, including the source code for your application.

4. **Environment Setup:** Use the `ENV` instructions to set environment variables and the `WORKDIR` instructions to define a working directory within the image.

5. **Starting your application:** Specify commands to start your application using the `CMD` or `ENTRYPOINT` instructions.

### Parsing the previous Dockerfile example:
___
```Dockerfile
### We use a basic Python image
FROM python:3.9-slim
```

This line indicates that we are using the Python base image version 3.9 with minimal installation (slim).
____
```Dockerfile
# Install dependencies
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y \
    build-essential \
    libpq-dev
```

This line uses the `RUN` instruction to execute the commands inside the image. We update the package list and install `build-essential` and `libpq-dev`.

In the Dockerfile, you can use any Linux console commands such as apt-get, apk, yum, and others, even if these commands are not included in the base image.

For example, if your base image is a Python image, you can still use apt-get to install Ubuntu or Debian packages even if Python doesn't include that utility by default.

This is one of the flexible features of Docker and allows you to create images with the software and dependencies you want, regardless of what is included in the base image.
___
```Dockerfile
# Create and navigate to the working directory
WORKDIR /app
```

This line sets the working directory inside the image to `/app`.

`WORKDIR` is the instruction in the Dockerfile that sets the working directory for all subsequent instructions in the Dockerfile. This means that all relative paths specified in the `COPY`, `ADD`, `RUN`, `CMD`, and other instructions will refer to this working directory.

For example, if you set `WORKDIR /app` to Dockerfile, all subsequent instructions will be executed inside the `/app` directory within your image.

An example of using `WORKDIR`:

```Dockerfile
# Set the working directory inside the image
WORKDIR /app

# Copy the application source code inside the working directory
COPY . .

# Install the Python dependencies from the requirements.txt file
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt

# Run the application
CMD ["python", "app.py"]
```

In this example, `WORKDIR /app` sets the working directory to `/app`. Then all instructions, including `COPY`, `RUN`, and `CMD`, will be executed relative to this directory.

Using `WORKDIR` is handy for simplifying the structure of your Dockerfile and makes it more readable. It also helps to avoid duplicate file and directory paths in Dockerfile instructions.
____

```Dockerfile
# Copy dependencies
COPY requirements.txt .

# Install Python dependencies
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt
```

These lines copy the `requirements.txt` file from the host machine to the image and install Python dependencies from that file.
____

```Dockerfile
# Copy the source code for the application
COPY . .
```

This line copies all files from the current directory (including your application source code) to the working directory inside the image.

**Example:** If you run Dockerfile while in the `task-manager` folder and use the `COPY . .` instruction after setting `WORKDIR /app`, a file and directory structure will be created in the Dockerfile container that matches the contents of your local `task-manager` folder.

After copying all files and folders into the container using `COPY . .`, the structure will look as follows inside the container:

```
/app
    ├─── <content of task-manager folder>
```

That is, all files and folders from the local `task-manager` folder will be copied inside the `/app` working directory inside the container.

Roughly like this:

```
/app
    ├── Dockerfile
    ├── requirements.txt
    ├── app.py
    ├── templates
    │   └── index.html
    └── static
        └── style.css
```

Thus, the `task-manager` folder from your local file system will not be copied into the container. Instead, the entire contents of that folder will be copied inside the `/app` working directory in the container.

____
```Dockerfile
# Specify the command to run the application
CMD ["python", "app.py"]
```

This line specifies the default command to run your application when the container starts.

Let's take a closer look at the `CMD` instruction in the Dockerfile.

### The CMD instruction:

`CMD` is an instruction in Dockerfile that defines the default command to be executed when the container is started. It specifies the executable or command that will be run when the container is started.

#### Syntax:

```
CMD ["executable", "param1", "param2", ...]
```

- `executable` is the executable or command to execute when the container is started.
- `` `param1`, `param2`, ... - are the parameters passed to this command.

#### Parsing arguments in CMD:

1. **First argument (executable):**
   - This argument specifies the executable or command to execute when the container is started. It is usually the name of the executable or command, such as `python`, `npm`, `bash`, etc.

2. **Following arguments (param1, param2, ...):**
   - These arguments are the parameters passed to the command. For example, if you use `CMD ["python", "app.py"]`, `python` will be the executable and `app.py` will be its parameter.

#### Examples of CMD usage:

```Dockerfile
# Run the default Python application
CMD ["python", "app.py"]
```

In this example, the ``python app.py`` command will be executed when the container is started.

```Dockerfile
# Start the Node.js server on port 3000
CMD ["node", "server.js"]
```

In this example, the `node server.js` command will be executed when the container is started.

#### CMD capabilities:

- `CMD` sets a default command to start the container, which can be overridden when the container is started using command line arguments.
- You can pass any number of parameters to the command, including zero. If no parameters are specified, only the executable will be executed.

#### Can there be more arguments to CMD?

Yes, `CMD` can contain more than one argument if necessary. For example, if you want to execute a command that accepts multiple parameters, you can pass them as a list of arguments inside `CMD`.

For example:

```Dockerfile
CMD ["bash", "-c", "echo Hello World"]
```

In this example, `bash -c "echo Hello World"` is a single argument containing the `echo Hello World` command that will be executed when the container is started.

___
#### Dockerfile capabilities and limitations:

#### Capabilities:
- **Full Customization:** Dockerfile allows you to fully customize your image, including installing dependencies, setting up the environment, and running your application.
- **Portability:** Dockerfile is part of your application and can be easily shared with other developers or used in CI/CD Pipelines.
- **Automation capability:** Dockerfile can be automatically built and deployed using CI/CD tools.

#### Limitations:
- **Limited functionality:** Dockerfile provides a limited set of instructions for

 image creation, and some advanced actions may require additional configuration.
- **Limited cache management:** Docker uses caching during the image building process using Dockerfile, but this can sometimes cause problems if the cache is not updated correctly.


#### Why build your own images:

- **Dependency Control:** Creating your own images allows you to control the environment and dependencies of your applications.
- **Portability:** Images can be easily ported and deployed on different systems without having to re-configure the environment.
- **Build Automation:** Dockerfile can be part of your CI/CD process, making it easy to build and deploy applications.
